+++
title = "Secrets"
date = "2 April 2001"
+++

This idea might have been converging in the undersides of my psyche for the past week. However here's what I think made it spark-up all of a sudden. There's this chapter in Peter Thiel's 'Zero to One' (self described as 'a note on startups, or how to build the future') called 'Secrets', wherein the author talks about the unknown, the things which have not yet been discovered to be laid down in the realm of absolute logical thought and the factors in the present day world which deceives the populace into thinking that there aren't a lot of secrets left to be discovered. This was a tempting and interesting read for me. Although not that ostensible, I am a resolute believer in this idea that a lot of interesting things are yet to be discovered and progress yet to be made. My Dad often says that my grandparents would never have imagined the way our daily life has turned out today. This comment is made frequently by every somebody every now and then, and is met with an expressive nod or a short phrase of agreement. However if you start to think about it, this is indeed a very interesting statement which while capable of being acknowledged and appraised by even the ficklest of minds, at the same time also nestles within it the fact that human thinking is bounded, that we're oblivious and blind to anything that is not an immediate part of our daily lives. A more apt way to put this is to say that, the flux of human thought resonates in an altogether different plane and shouldn't be confused to be in the same plane as of objective and palpable logic. It takes unconventional thinking and hard work, to bring something that is not obvious to light. The crux of the entire chapter is that secrets do exist, and they're hard to find, but nevertheless one should keep looking for them cause what you're gonna find will be novel and interesting and will open a new channel for human thought. And that usually means progress.

Back to the main dialogue. Secrets exists in every field that has been subjected to scrutiny by humanity, and that includes the understanding of human thought itself. It can be said that human beings are both largely predictable and mysterious at the same time. While there are certain behaviors which are expected of human beings, the reasons as to why we display a characteristic demeanor remains largely a mystery. Some tendencies which have been discovered by psychologists have been exploited by companies and businessmen. A very remarkable example is what behavioral economists call the 'Sandwich Theory'. For those unaware, it states that you can considerably increase the chances of convincing someone to do something which they're unlikely to do by 'sandwiching' it in between two prospects which are attractive to the person in question. For instance, imagine that you're watching your favorite actor playing a role which you like, and in the middle of it does something that you don't really approve. But that action is not really stressed or is not prominent. In this case, since you like what's going on as we all to some extent try to imitate our heroes, your subconscious inadvertently develops a disposition towards the activity which even you don't really approve of. Next time while you are in a situation involving that activity, you'll notice that you developed a better tolerance to it. Now that you've heard it, it all sounds simple and obvious to you, only that it wasn't until someone who really thought about it explained it to you. Why didn't you notice it beforehand? Because secrets are hidden and only those who seek them shall find them. Like this theory, it is arguable to say that there are a ton of secrets about the human mind that are not evident or comprehensible to anyone. But these secrets live and begs for us to notice. Only we're too busy trudging through the mundane which dominate our seemingly boring lives.

I am someone who is capable of appreciating this fact every time I think about it. Which makes me think that there's definitely something that I can contribute to the study of human thought. I am able to navigate the intricacies of how people make choices and I can easily predict which behaviors lead to which outcomes. One could say that I have a knack for predictive thinking and understanding people. And so, I was musing about the prospect of picking up some books on psychology and philosophy to stimulate my dull brain, so that one day I might unearth a secret. We all have it in us, the zest for untangling mysteries and solving problems. Sometimes the societal pressure gets us worked up, and we end up chasing things like money and a comfortable life. Intermittently we are pinged by curiosity, and I think we should make it a priority to more often than not accept the call and demystify the riddle. It is a noble pursuit, and it'll make you happy in the end.

I like the word 'secret'. It has got a ring to it.